IAEA-SM-354/89P

XA9951336

MONTE-CARLO COMPUTATIONS OF EFFICIENCY, SELF-ATTENUATION AND
COINCIDENCE CORRECTIONS IN LOW-LEVEL GAMMA-SPECTROMETRY
C. DOVLETE and P. P. POVINEC
International Atomic Energy Agency, Marine Environment Laboratory, Monaco
The standard efficiency calibration of germanium detectors for gamma-ray
spectrometry required a lengthy effort with multiple-energy sources for many necessary
geometries. In order to reduce the experimental effort and to improve the accuracy of
efficiency calibration, Monte Carlo simulation is an attractive means because any sourcedetector configuration and any sample matrix can be modeled over the energy interval of
interest [1,2].
In this paper we present the procedure used at IAEA-MEL for efficiency calibration
of new large volume germanium detectors for various measurement geometries, including
self-attenuation and coincidence corrections.
The first step in this procedure is to adjust model detector parameters in order to
obtain the best agreement between experimentally derived and calculated efficiencies for a
given calibration sample. Thus we obtain efficiencies experimentally using the calibration
sample which contains two suitable, coincidence-free, gamma lines. One of them must be
below the 60 keV and the other, preferably above 600 keV.
In order to theoretically evaluate the efficiency, matrix and coincidence corrections,
we use the extensively tested GESPECOR method and algorithms [2]. According to this
methodology, the efficiency and the correction factors are computed using a realistic Monte
Carlo simulation method. Then based on the experimental and theoretical results for a given
geometry we adjust the detector parameters used in theoretical Monte Carlo efficiency
computations in order to achieve the best agreement between experimental and calculated
efficiency values. With these adjusted detector parameters we can then calculate the
efficiencies for various geometries and matrix samples.
In fact our procedure needs only one calibration sample for all measuring
geometries. However, if the composition and/or the density of the sample to be measured
differ from the corresponding values of our calibration sample, self-attenuation corrections
should be applied to the efficiency. These corrections depend on the sample geometry,
composition and density, and on detector parameters. Of course, the corrections are higher
for large volume, high Z and high density samples, for low energy photons. In the case of a
nuclide decaying through a cascade of successive photon emissions, measured close to a high
efficiency detector, coincidence-summing effects can be important.
The efficiency, self-attenuation and coincidence corrections computations were
performed for a 680 cm^ HPGe detector characterised by the parameters presented in Table
1.
The variation of self-attenuation correction with energy is presented for a particular
sediment sample for the energy range 30-3500 keV.
The self-attenuation correction presented in Fig.l has to be applied to estimate
detection efficiencies for sediment samples (density 1.3 g/cm^) using the efficiency
calibration data previously calculated for water (1.0 g/cm^).
The necessary self-attenuation correction for a sediment sample (sample density=1.3
g/cm^) is presented for the energy range 30-3500 keV
Finally, we present the results of computations performed for a 680 cm^ HPGe
detector (Table 1) and sediment samples for the efficiencies and the energy-dependent selfattenuation factor for the energy range 30-3500 keV. As an example, a self-attenuation
correction (Fig.l) has to be applied to estimate detection efficiencies for sediment samples
(density 1.3 g/cm^) using the efficiency calibration data calculated for water (1.0 g/cm3).

398

1.00

0.75

i---

0.50

0.25
1000

100
Energy (keV)

Fig. 1 Self-attenuation correction factor versus energy

Detector parameters
Detector radius
Detector length
Inner contact: Radius
Inner contact: Length
Detector holder material
Thickness of Ge dead layer
Distance from the active face
to entrance window
End cap diameter
Window thickness

cm
4.53
9.59
0.7
7.2
0.2
0.05
0.5
9.2
0.1

Table 1. Detector parameters
Also we have calculated the necessary coincidence corrections for a few frequently
encountered radionuclides, with coincidence problems, such as Co-60, Cs-134, Y-88, Ag110m, Eu-155, Sb-125, etc. As expected the resulting coincidence corrections are important
and must be taken into account in order to obtain accurate results.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

Kamboj, S., Kahn, B. Evaluation of Monte-Carlo simulation of photon counting
efficiency for germanium detectors, Health Physics (1996) 512-519.
Sima, O., Arnold, D., Self-attenuation and coincidence-summing corrections
calculated by Monte Carlo simulations for gamma-spectrometric measurements with
well-type Germanium detectors, Applied Radiation and Isotopes, 47 (1996) 889-893.

399

