Eigenvalue -- from Wolfram MathWorld

Page 1 of 5
Search Site

Algebra
Applied Mathematics
Calculus and Analysis
Discrete Mathematics

Algebra > Linear Algebra > Matrices > Matrix Eigenvalues
Algebra > Linear Algebra > Matrices > Matrix Decomposition

Other Wolfram Sites:
Wolfram Research
Integrator

Eigenvalue

Tones

Foundations of Mathematics

Functions Site

Geometry

Wolfram Science

History and Terminology

more…

Number Theory
Probability and Statistics
Recreational Mathematics
Topology
Alphabetical Index
Interactive Entries
Random Entry
New in MathWorld
MathWorld Classroom
About MathWorld
Send a Message to the Team
Order book from Amazon

12,636 entries
Mon Oct 9 2006

Eigenvalues are a special set of scalars associated with a linear system of equations
(i.e., a matrix equation) that are sometimes also known as characteristic roots,
characteristic values (Hoffman and Kunze 1971), proper values, or latent roots
(Marcus and Minc 1988, p. 144).
The determination of the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a system is extremely
important in physics and engineering, where it is equivalent to matrix
diagonalization and arises in such common applications as stability analysis, the
physics of rotating bodies, and small oscillations of vibrating systems, to name only
a few. Each eigenvalue is paired with a corresponding so-called eigenvector (or, in
general, a corresponding right eigenvector and a corresponding left eigenvector;
there is no analogous distinction between left and right for eigenvalues).
The decomposition of a square matrix
into eigenvalues and eigenvectors is known
in this work as eigen decomposition, and the fact that this decomposition is always
possible as long as the matrix consisting of the eigenvectors of
is square is
known as the eigen decomposition theorem.
Let

be a linear transformation represented by a matrix
such that

Latest Mathematica Information >>
Download Mathematica Trial >>
Complete Mathematica
Documentation >>
Show your math savvy with a
MathWorld T-shirt.
Read the latest Technical Software
News.
Mathematica 5.1 outperforms
specialist programs for most matrix
operations.
Compute Eigenvalues symbolically
and numerically--as well as any
other matrix operation--with
Mathematica for Students --starting
at $44.95.
Mathematica offers hundreds of
linear algebra functions. Try it today!

. If there is a vector

(1)
for some scalar , then
eigenvector .

http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Eigenvalue.html

is called the eigenvalue of

with corresponding (right)

10/10/2006

Eigenvalue -- from Wolfram MathWorld
Letting

Page 2 of 5
be a

square matrix

(2)

with eigenvalue , then the corresponding eigenvectors satisfy

(3)

which is equivalent to the homogeneous system

(4)

Equation (4) can be written compactly as
(5)
where is the identity matrix. As shown in Cramer's rule, a linear system of
equations has nontrivial solutions iff the determinant vanishes, so the solutions of
equation (5) are given by
(6)
This equation is known as the characteristic equation of
known as the characteristic polynomial.
For example, for a

http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Eigenvalue.html

, and the left-hand side is

matrix, the eigenvalues are

10/10/2006

Eigenvalue -- from Wolfram MathWorld

Page 3 of 5

(7)
which arises as the solutions of the characteristic equation
(8)
If all eigenvalues are different, then plugging these back in gives
independent equations for the components of each corresponding eigenvector,
and the system is said to be nondegenerate. If the eigenvalues are -fold
degenerate, then the system is said to be degenerate and the eigenvectors are not
linearly independent. In such cases, the additional constraint that the eigenvectors
be orthogonal,
(9)
where
is the Kronecker delta , can be applied to yield
thus allowing solution for the eigenvectors.

additional constraints,

Eigenvalues may be computed in Mathematica using Eigenvalues[matrix].
Eigenvectors and eigenvalues can be returned together using the command
Eigensystem[matrix].
Assume we know the eigenvalue for
(10)
Adding a constant times the identity matrix to

,
(11)

so the new eigenvalues equal the old plus . Multiplying

by a constant
(12)

so the new eigenvalues are the old multiplied by .

http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Eigenvalue.html

10/10/2006

Eigenvalue -- from Wolfram MathWorld

Page 4 of 5

Now consider a similarity transformation of

. Let

be the determinant of

, then
(13)
(14)

so the eigenvalues are the same as for

.

SEE ALSO: Brauer's Theorem, Characteristic Equation, Characteristic Polynomial,

Complex Matrix, Condition Number, Eigen Decomposition, Eigen Decomposition
Theorem, Eigenfunction, Eigenvector, Frobenius Theorem, Gerschgorin Circle
Theorem, Lyapunov's First Theorem, Lyapunov's Second Theorem, Matrix
Diagonalization, Ostrowski's Theorem, Perron's Theorem, Perron-Frobenius
Theorem, Poincaré Separation Theorem, Random Matrix, Real Matrix, Schur's
Inequalities, Similarity Transformation, Sturmian Separation Theorem, Sylvester's
Inertia Law, Wielandt's Theorem. [Pages Linking Here]

REFERENCES:
Arfken, G. "Eigenvectors, Eigenvalues." §4.7 in Mathematical Methods for Physicists, 3rd ed.
Orlando, FL: Academic Press, pp. 229-237, 1985.
Hoffman, K. and Kunze, R. "Characteristic Values." §6.2 in Linear Algebra, 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall, p. 182, 1971.
Kaltofen, E. "Challenges of Symbolic Computation: My Favorite Open Problems." J. Symb. Comput.
29, 891-919, 2000.
Marcus, M. and Minc, H. Introduction to Linear Algebra. New York: Dover, p. 145, 1988.
Nash, J. C. "The Algebraic Eigenvalue Problem." Ch. 9 in Compact Numerical Methods for
Computers: Linear Algebra and Function Minimisation, 2nd ed. Bristol, England: Adam Hilger, pp.
102-118, 1990.
Press, W. H.; Flannery, B. P.; Teukolsky, S. A.; and Vetterling, W. T. "Eigensystems." Ch. 11 in
Numerical Recipes in FORTRAN: The Art of Scientific Computing, 2nd ed. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press, pp. 449-489, 1992.

http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Eigenvalue.html

10/10/2006

Eigenvalue -- from Wolfram MathWorld

Page 5 of 5

LAST MODIFIED: December 10, 2004
CITE THIS AS:
Weisstein, Eric W. "Eigenvalue." From MathWorld--A Wolfram Web Resource.
http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Eigenvalue.html

© 1999 CRC Press LLC, © 1999-2006 Wolfram Research, Inc. | Terms of Use

http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Eigenvalue.html

10/10/2006

