Matrix Diagonalization -- from Wolfram MathWorld

Page 1 of 3
Search Site

Algebra
Applied Mathematics

Algebra > Linear Algebra > Matrices > Matrix Operations
Algebra > Linear Algebra > Matrices > Matrix Decomposition
Algebra > Linear Algebra > Matrices > Matrix Eigenvalues

Other Wolfram Sites:
Wolfram Research
Integrator

Calculus and Analysis
Discrete Mathematics
Foundations of Mathematics

Matrix Diagonalization

Tones
Functions Site

Geometry

Wolfram Science

History and Terminology

more…

Number Theory
Latest Mathematica Information >>

Probability and Statistics
Recreational Mathematics
Topology
Alphabetical Index
Interactive Entries
Random Entry
New in MathWorld

Matrix diagonalization is the process of taking a square matrix and converting it into
a special type of matrix--a so-called diagonal matrix--that shares the same
fundamental properties of the underlying matrix. Matrix diagonalization is
equivalent to transforming the underlying system of equations into a special set of
coordinate axes in which the matrix takes this canonical form. Diagonalizing a
matrix is also equivalent to finding the matrix's eigenvalues, which turn out to be
precisely the entries of the diagonalized matrix. Similarly, the eigenvectors make up
the new set of axes corresponding to the diagonal matrix.

Download Mathematica Trial >>
Complete Mathematica
Documentation >>
Show your math savvy with a
MathWorld T-shirt.
Read the latest Technical Software
News.

MathWorld Classroom
About MathWorld
Send a Message to the Team
Order book from Amazon

12,635 entries
Tue Oct 10 2006

The remarkable relationship between a diagonalized matrix, eigenvalues, and
eigenvectors follows from the beautiful mathematical identity (the eigen
decomposition) that a square matrix
can be decomposed into the very special
form
(1)
where is a matrix composed of the eigenvectors of , is the diagonal matrix
constructed from the corresponding eigenvalues, and
is the matrix inverse of
According to the eigen decomposition theorem, an initial matrix equation

.

(2)
can always be written
(3)

http://mathworld.wolfram.com/MatrixDiagonalization.html

10/10/2006

Matrix Diagonalization -- from Wolfram MathWorld

(at least as long as
gives

Page 2 of 3

is a square matrix), and premultiplying both sides by

(4)
Since the same linear transformation
is being applied to both
and
the original system is equivalent to solving the transformed system

, solving

(5)
where
and
. This provides a way to canonicalize a system into
the simplest possible form, reduce the number of parameters from
for an
arbitrary matrix to for a diagonal matrix, and obtain the characteristic properties
of the initial matrix. This approach arises frequently in physics and engineering,
where the technique is oft used and extremely powerful.
SEE ALSO: Diagonal Matrix, Eigen Decomposition, Eigen Decomposition Theorem,

Eigenvalue, Eigenvector, Jacobi Transformation, Matrix. [Pages Linking Here]

REFERENCES:
Arfken, G. "Diagonalization of Matrices." §4.6 in Mathematical Methods for Physicists, 3rd ed.
Orlando, FL: Academic Press, pp. 217-229, 1985.

LAST MODIFIED: December 11, 2002
CITE THIS AS:
Weisstein, Eric W. "Matrix Diagonalization." From MathWorld--A Wolfram Web Resource.
http://mathworld.wolfram.com/MatrixDiagonalization.html

http://mathworld.wolfram.com/MatrixDiagonalization.html

10/10/2006

Matrix Diagonalization -- from Wolfram MathWorld

Page 3 of 3

© 1999 CRC Press LLC, © 1999-2006 Wolfram Research, Inc. | Terms of Use

http://mathworld.wolfram.com/MatrixDiagonalization.html

10/10/2006

