Quasi-Minimal Residual Method -- from Wolfram MathWorld

Page 1 of 3
Search Site

Algebra
Applied Mathematics
Calculus and Analysis
Discrete Mathematics

Applied Mathematics > Numerical Methods > Linear Systems > Iterative Methods
MathWorld Contributors > Templates

Quasi-Minimal Residual Method

Other Wolfram Sites:
Wolfram Research
Integrator
Tones

Foundations of Mathematics

Functions Site

Geometry

Wolfram Science

History and Terminology

more…

Number Theory
Probability and Statistics
Recreational Mathematics
Topology
Alphabetical Index

The biconjugate gradient method often displays rather irregular convergence
behavior. Moreover, the implicit LU decomposition of the reduced tridiagonal system
may not exist, resulting in a breakdown of the algorithm. The quasi-minimal
residual method (Freund and Nachtigal 1991) is a related algorithm that attempts
to overcome these problems.

Interactive Entries
Random Entry
New in MathWorld
MathWorld Classroom
About MathWorld
Send a Message to the Team
Order book from Amazon

12,636 entries
Mon Oct 9 2006

The main idea behind the quasi-minimal residual (QMR) method algorithm is to
solve the reduced tridiagonal system in a least squares sense, similar to the
approach followed in the generalized minimal residual method (GMRES). Since the
constructed basis for the Krylov subspace is biorthogonal, rather than orthogonal as
in GMRES, the obtained solution is viewed as a quasi-minimal residual solution,
which explains the name. Additionally, QMR uses look-ahead techniques to avoid
breakdowns in the underlying Lanczos process, which makes it more robust than
the biconjugate gradient method.

Latest Mathematica Information >>
Download Mathematica Trial >>
Complete Mathematica
Documentation >>
Show your math savvy with a
MathWorld T-shirt.
Read the latest Technical Software
News.

The convergence behavior of QMR is typically much smoother than for the
biconjugate gradient method (BCG). Freund and Nachtigal (1991) present quite
general error bounds which show that QMR may be expected to converge about as
fast as the generalized minimal residual method. From a relation between the
residuals in BCG and QMR (Freund and Nachtigal 1991, relation 5.10) one may
deduce that at phases in the iteration process where BCG makes significant
progress, QMR has arrived at about the same approximation for . On the other
hand, when BCG makes no progress at all, QMR may still show slow convergence.
The look-ahead steps in this version of the QMR method prevent breakdown in all
cases except the so-called "incurable breakdown," where no practical number of
look-ahead steps would yield a next iterate.

http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Quasi-MinimalResidualMethod.html

10/10/2006

Quasi-Minimal Residual Method -- from Wolfram MathWorld

Page 2 of 3

The pseudocode for the preconditioned quasi-minimal residual method with
preconditioner
is given above. This algorithm follows the two term
recurrence version without look-ahead (Freund and Nachtigal 1994, Algorithm 7.1).
This version of QMR is simpler to implement than the full QMR method with lookahead, but it is susceptible to breakdown of the underlying Lanczos process. (Other
implementation variations are whether to scale Lanczos vectors or not, or to use
three-term recurrences instead of coupled two-term recurrences. Such decisions
usually have implications for the stability and the efficiency of the algorithm.)
Computation of the residual is done for the convergence test. If one uses right (or
post) preconditioning, that is
, then a cheap upper bound for
can be
computed in each iteration, avoiding the recursions for
(Freund and Nachtigal
1991), Proposition 4.1). This upper bound may be pessimistic by a factor of at most
.
QMR has roughly the same problems with respect to vector and parallel
implementation as the biconjugate gradient method. The scalar overhead per
iteration is slightly more than for BCG. In all cases where the slightly cheaper BCG
method converges irregularly (but fast enough), QMR may be preferred for stability
reasons.
SEE ALSO: Biconjugate Gradient Method, Biconjugate Gradient Stabilized Method,

Chebyshev Iteration, Conjugate Gradient Method, Conjugate Gradient Method on
the Normal Equations, Conjugate Gradient Squared Method, Flexible Generalized
Minimal Residual Method, Generalized Minimal Residual Method , Linear System of
Equations, Minimal Residual Method, Nonstationary Iterative Method,
Preconditioner, Stationary Iterative Method, Symmetric LQ Method, Transpose-Free
Quasi-Minimal Residual Method. [Pages Linking Here]
This entry contributed by Noel Black and Shirley Moore, adapted from Barrett et al.
(1994) (author's link)

REFERENCES:
Barrett, R.; Berry, M.; Chan, T. F.; Demmel, J.; Donato, J.; Dongarra, J.; Eijkhout, V.; Pozo, R.;
Romine, C.; and Van der Vorst, H. Templates for the Solution of Linear Systems: Building Blocks for
Iterative Methods, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: SIAM, 1994.
http://www.netlib.org/linalg/html_templates/Templates.html.

http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Quasi-MinimalResidualMethod.html

10/10/2006

Quasi-Minimal Residual Method -- from Wolfram MathWorld

Page 3 of 3

Freund, R. and Nachtigal, N. "QMR: A Quasi-Minimal Residual Method for Non-Hermitian Linear
Systems." Numer. Math. 60, 315-339, 1991.
Freund, R. and Nachtigal, N. "An Implementation of the QMR Method Based on Coupled Two-Term
Recurrences." SIAM J. Sci. Statist. Comput. 15, 313 -337, 1994.

LAST MODIFIED: July 24, 2003
CITE THIS AS:
Black, Noel and Moore, Shirley. "Quasi-Minimal Residual Method." From MathWorld--A Wolfram Web
Resource, created by Eric W. Weisstein. http://mathworld.wolfram.com/QuasiMinimalResidualMethod.html

© 1999-2006 Wolfram Research, Inc. | Terms of Use

http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Quasi-MinimalResidualMethod.html

10/10/2006

