Symmetric LQ Method -- from Wolfram MathWorld

Page 1 of 3
Search Site

Algebra
Applied Mathematics
Calculus and Analysis
Discrete Mathematics

Applied Mathematics > Numerical Methods > Linear Systems > Iterative Methods
MathWorld Contributors > Templates

Other Wolfram Sites:
Wolfram Research
Integrator

Symmetric LQ Method

Tones

Foundations of Mathematics

Functions Site

Geometry

Wolfram Science

History and Terminology

more…

Number Theory
Probability and Statistics
Recreational Mathematics
Topology
Alphabetical Index
Interactive Entries
Random Entry
New in MathWorld
MathWorld Classroom
About MathWorld
Send a Message to the Team

The conjugate gradient method can be viewed as a special variant of the Lanczos
method for positive definite symmetric systems. The minimal residual method and
symmetric LQ method (SYMMLQ) are variants that can be applied to symmetric
indefinite systems.
The vector sequences in the conjugate gradient method correspond to a
factorization of a tridiagonal matrix similar to the coefficient matrix. Therefore, a
breakdown of the algorithm can occur corresponding to a zero pivot if the matrix is
indefinite. Furthermore, for indefinite matrices the minimization property of the
conjugate gradient method is no longer well-defined. The MINRES and SYMMLQ
methods are variants of the CG method that avoid the LU decomposition and do not
suffer from breakdown. SYMMLQ solves the projected system, but does not
minimize anything (it keeps the residual orthogonal to all previous ones).

Latest Mathematica Information >>
Download Mathematica Trial >>
Complete Mathematica
Documentation >>
Show your math savvy with a
MathWorld T-shirt.
Read the latest Technical Software
News.

Order book from Amazon

12,636 entries
Mon Oct 9 2006

When
is not positive definite, but symmetric, we can still construct an orthogonal
basis for the Krylov subspace by three-term recurrence relations. Eliminating the
search directions in the equations of the conjugate gradient method gives a
recurrence
(1)
which can be written in matrix form as
(2)

http://mathworld.wolfram.com/SymmetricLQMethod.html

10/10/2006

Symmetric LQ Method -- from Wolfram MathWorld
where

is an

Page 2 of 3
tridiagonal matrix.

In this case we have the problem that
no longer defines an inner product.
However we can still try to minimize the residual in the 2-norm by obtaining
(3)
that minimizes
(4)
(5)
Now we exploit the fact that if
(6)
then
subspace:

is an orthonormal transformation with respect to the current Krylov

(7)
and this final expression can simply be seen as a minimum norm least squares
problem.
One approach is to solve the system
, as in the conjugate gradient
method ( is the upper
part of ). However, other than in the conjugate
gradient method, we cannot rely on the existence of a Cholesky decomposition
(since
is not positive definite). An alternative is then to decompose
by an LQ
decomposition. This leads to simple recurrences and the resulting method is known
as SYMMLQ (Paige and Saunders 1975).
SEE ALSO: Biconjugate Gradient Method, Chebyshev Iteration, Conjugate Gradient

Method on the Normal Equations Conjugate Gradient Method , Conjugate Gradient
Squared Method, Flexible Generalized Minimal Residual Method, Generalized
Minimal Residual Method , Linear System of Equations, Minimal Residual Method,
Nonstationary Iterative Method, Preconditioner, Quasi-Minimal Residual Method

http://mathworld.wolfram.com/SymmetricLQMethod.html

10/10/2006

Symmetric LQ Method -- from Wolfram MathWorld

Page 3 of 3

Stationary Iterative Method, Transpose-Free Quasi-Minimal Residual Method.
[Pages Linking Here]
This entry contributed by Noel Black and Shirley Moore, adapted from Barrett et al.
(1994) (author's link)

REFERENCES:
Barrett, R.; Berry, M.; Chan, T. F.; Demmel, J.; Donato, J.; Dongarra, J.; Eijkhout, V.; Pozo, R.;
Romine, C.; and Van der Vorst, H. Templates for the Solution of Linear Systems: Building Blocks for
Iterative Methods, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: SIAM, 1994.
http://www.netlib.org/linalg/html_templates/Templates.html.
Paige, C.; Parlett, B.; and van der Vorst, H. "Approximate Solutions and Eigenvalue Bounds from
Krylov Subspaces." Numer. Lin. Alg. Appl. 29, 115 -134, 1995.
Paige, C. and Saunders, M. "Solution of Sparse Indefinite Systems of Linear Equations." SIAM J.
Numer. Anal. 12, 617-629, 1975.

LAST MODIFIED: July 29, 2003
CITE THIS AS:
Black, Noel and Moore, Shirley. "Symmetric LQ Method." From MathWorld--A Wolfram Web
Resource, created by Eric W. Weisstein. http://mathworld.wolfram.com/SymmetricLQMethod.html

© 1999-2006 Wolfram Research, Inc. | Terms of Use

http://mathworld.wolfram.com/SymmetricLQMethod.html

10/10/2006

