FLEXIBILITY OF CO2 COOLED FAST REACTORS FOR PLUTONIUM AND MINOR
ACTINIDE MANAGEMENT
H M Beaumont, G Hulme, J T Murgatroyd, R E Sunderland, E K Whyman,
NNC Ltd. Booths Hall, Chelford Road, Knutsford Cheshire, WA13 8QZ, UK
Tel: +44 (0)1565 633800
Fax: +44 (0)1565 843878
e-mail: heather.beaumont@nnc.co.uk
S J Crossley
BNFL plc., Springfields Works, Nr. Preston, Lancashire, PR4 OXJ, UK
Tel: +44 (0) 1772 762216
Fax: +44 (0) 1772 762470
e-mail: steven.j.crossley@bnfl.com
Summary
In recent years there has been increased interest in gas cooled fast reactor systems for the
management of plutonium and minor actinides. Gas-cooled fast reactors have a number of
advantages over liquid metal fuelled concepts. There are obvious safety, economic and technical
advantages of using a relatively benign, readily available and optically transparent, gaseous
coolant which is compatible with both air and water, compared to sodium which reacts
explosively with water and requires specialist handling and disposal. The absence of a significant
positive coolant void reactivity effect in gas-cooled cores compared to LMFBRs also allows the
potential for loading greater quantities of minor actinide isotopes. Loading large quantities of
minor actinide isotopes into sodium cooled cores has been shown to lead to unacceptably large
positive coolant void effects. An additional attractive feature of gas-cooling over sodium cooling,
in terms of minor actinide incineration, is the harder neutron spectrum of gas-cooled cores.
Drawing on the extensive UK experience gained in the successful design and operation of
the Advanced Gas Reactors (AGRs) coupled with the experience gained from the design of the
liquid metal fast reactors and earlier UK designs of gas-cooled fast reactors, a number of different
gas-cooled fast reactor systems ranging from a conventional, plutonium burning, design based on
existing technology to a dedicated minor actinide burning system have been investigated. The
potential of a gas-cooled fast breeder reactor has also been demonstrated.
This paper reviews the main, representative, core designs considered to date
concentrating on the core physics and safety aspects particularly in terms of plutonium and minor
actinide management. In this context the advantages of gas-cooling over sodium cooling are
highlighted. Three basic designs are considered in some detail.
i)
A conventional core design which has been optimised for plutonium burning and utilises
conventional MOX fuel pellets. The steel diluent sub-assemblies in the inner core region
for this concept allow scope for balancing the enrichment levels in the inner and outer
core regions which is advantageous in increasing the overall plutonium burning, whilst
also producing a relatively flat power profile across the core.

ii)

A dedicated minor actinide burning concept, fuelled mainly with minor actinides and
only sufficient plutonium to obtain criticality. This concept utilises nitride fuel coupled
with a zirconium hydride moderator.
iii)
A core design optimised for plutonium breeding. This concept is based on conventional
MOX fuelled pins and incorporates both axial and radial breeder blankets.
All the designs considered are for commercial sizes reactors with a thermal power output of
3600 MW, comparable to the European Fast Reactor (EFR).
The studies have considered core design, core performance, safety parameters, and
preliminary transient studies and have demonstrated the significant flexibility of gas-cooled fast
reactors towards fuel and fuel cycle utilisation.

