Home

Browse by Inventor

Browse by Date

Links

Contact Us

Type your search term here

United States Patent 5553109

Inventor(s)

Quotables

Apparatus and methods for simulating a change in axial
power shape during a nuclear fuel rod bundle transient

"The Americans have need of the
telephone, but we do not. We have plenty
of messenger boys."

US Patent Issued on September 3, 1996

Sir William Preece, chief engineer,
British Post Office; 1878

ABSTRACT

CLAIMS

Bruce Matzner

Assignee
General Electric Company

Application
No. 328435 filed on 1994-10-25

Current US Class

Abstract
Apparatus is
provided for
simulating a
nuclear fuel
rod bundle
transient

376/463 , 219/439 , 392/500 , 434/218

Field of Search
219/430 , 219/437 , 219/439 , 219/441 ,
219/442 , 219/483 , 219/486 , 219/487 ,
376/245 , 376/259 , 376/277 , 376/463 ,
392/447 , 392/448 , 392/451 , 392/454 ,
392/500 , 392/501 , 434/218

Examiners
Primary: Daniel D Wasil

Attorney, Agent or Firm

condition and
includes a
vessel for
containing a

DESCRIPTION

FULL TEXT

Patent Attorney Jobs
The latest Pharmaceutical Jobs at at eMedCareers. Register
today!
eMedCareers.co.uk
Companies House
Free Searches. Company reports from £1.69. Company formation
from £29.
www.duport.co.uk
IT Dispute Resolution
Resolved 500+ IT dispute matters 1day prelim assessment and
strategy
www.bestpracticegroup.com
Free Delivery on Kickers
Kids Kickers Shoes. Baby & Child Boots, Shoes, Leather, Patent.
www.parklifeclothes.co.uk

coolant, a
pair of heating elements disposed in the vessel and a power supply
for supplying power over time to each of the heating elements. The
power supply is independently controlled whereby a variable supply
of power over time to each heating element is provided, thus
simulating the variation in power output and axial flux shape in a
nuclear fuel bundle as a function of time.

Nixon & Vanderhye

US Patent References
5098641
5361729

Claims
What is claimed is:
1. Apparatus for simulating a nuclear fuel rod bundle transient
comprising:
a vessel for containing a coolant;
a plurality of nuclear fuel rod simulating members disposed in said
vessel for disposition in the coolant and forming a simulated nuclear
fuel rod bundle;
each member including a pair of heating elements;
a power supply for supplying power over time to each of said heating
elements; and
means for independently controlling and thereby varying the supply
of power over time to each said heating element of each member of
said plurality of nuclear fuel rod simulating members thereby to
simulate a change over time in both power output and axial flux shape
of a nuclear fuel rod bundle.
2. Apparatus according to claim 1 wherein said pair of heating
elements terminate at one end within said vessel and at other ends
outside said vessel.
3. Apparatus according to claim 1 wherein said pair of heating
elements have ends terminating outside said vessel.
4. Apparatus according to claim 1 wherein said heating elements
comprise a double helix arrangement thereof, a surrounding tubular
cladding and electrical insulating material between said heating
elements and said cladding.

5. Apparatus according to claim 1 wherein said heating elements are
coaxial relative to one another and an electrically insulating material
between said coaxially arranged heating element.
6. Apparatus according to claim 5 wherein said pair of heating
elements have ends terminating outside said vessel.
7. A method for simulating a nuclear fuel rod bundle transient in a
vessel having a plurality of nuclear fuel rod simulating members,
each member having two heating elements, comprising the steps of:
independently supplying power to said heating elements of each said
member; and
controlling said supply of power to said heating elements
independently of one another to vary the power supply over time to
each element to simulate a change over time in both the (i) power
output and (ii) axial flux shape of a nuclear fuel bundle.
8. A method for simulating a nuclear fuel rod bundle transient
comprising the steps of:
providing at least one nuclear fuel rod simulating member within a
vessel containing a coolant;
providing said member with a pair of heating elements extending
substantially the full length of said member;
independently supplying power to said heating elements of said
member; and
controlling said supply of power to said heating elements
independently of one another to vary the power supplied over time to
each element to simulate a change over time in both the (i) power
output and (ii) axial heat flux shape of a nuclear fuel bundle.
Description
TECHNICAL FIELD
The present invention relates to apparatus and methods for simulating
a nuclear fuel rod bundle transient and particularly relates to such
apparatus and methods for simulating the effect of the change in
both integrated bundle power and the axial power or flux shape as a
function of time during a transient, for example, in a boiling water
reactor.
BACKGROUND
There are many different types of nuclear reactor transient events.
For example, the load on a turbine driven by steam from a nuclear
power plant may be removed from the turbine by any one of a
number of events, causing a short in the electric power transmission
lines. Should such transient event occur, typically the stop valves to
the turbine are closed, shutting down the delivery of steam to the
turbine. The nuclear reactor, however, is still producing full power. To
control the reactor in view of the transient, the control rods are driven
into the reactor and valves are opened to bypass steam to a
condenser. Safety considerations, however, require preparation for
failures in the system, including, for example, those where the
condenser bypass valve cannot be closed and the reactor continues
to produce full steam power.
In that event, and in a boiling water reactor (BWR), a pressure spike
occurs, the position of the boiling boundary between the single and
two-phase regions within the reactor vessel shifts upwardly, the
average void distribution of the fuel changes downwardly and the
overall power output increases. This changes the axial power or flux
shape of the fuel rod bundle. The axial power or flux shape is the
power associated with each axial location in the fuel bundle. In a
typical situation, and early in the life of the fuel, the power
distribution is at a peak adjacent the bottom of the fuel bundle and
the instantaneous power along the fuel bundle upwardly from the peak
falls off. When a transient occurs, the boiling boundary moves
upwardly along the fuel bundle and displaces the peak of the heat

flux curve upwardly along the bundle. The value of the peak of the
heat flux curve also changes in response to movement of the boiling
boundary. Thus, as the transient progresses, the peak of the heat
flux curve is not only displaced upwardly along the fuel bundle but
also changes in value so that a greater outlet peak power distribution
momentarily occurs. As the effect of control rod insertion and
increased reactor voiding decrease neutron flux levels, the peak
reactor surface heat flux will be in approximately two seconds.
Present-day nuclear fuel bundle simulators employ fuel rod
simulators in a closed vessel containing a coolant. Such fuel bundle
simulators, however, are limited in their capability. For example,
present testing matches total bundle fuel rod surface heat flux with
anticipated nuclear fuel bundle surface heat flux and it is the result of
these tests which are used to quantify transient computer codes for
application to reactor transient analyses. More particularly, today all
test facilities employ heating elements in which the only control over
each heating element is the magnitude of the power input to the
heating elements. While more or less power could be supplied to the
heating elements, the simulated axial power or flux shape is fixed.
Thus, while the power supply to the heating elements could be varied
over time to obtain the correct total bundle power as a function of
time, the change in the axial power or flux shape could not be
simulated.
DISCLOSURE OF THE INVENTION
According to the present invention, it has been recognized that during
a transient event in a nuclear reactor core not only does the fuel
bundle total power change but also the axial power shape varies with
time. To my knowledge, this effect has not been studied in an out of
reactor test using fuel rod simulators. Obtaining this type of
experimental data is highly desirable in order to be able to check the
ability of computer codes which predict the transient performance of
nuclear reactor fuel to evaluate this more realistic simulation of
postulated reactor transient events.
The power of the fuel bundle can be represented mathematically as a
function of axial position and time, i.e.:
P=f(x,t); Equation (1)
where x and t represent axial position upwardly along the heated
length and time from the beginning of the transient event,
respectively. Mathematically, a function f(x,t) can be approximated
as used in Equation (1) by
f(x,t).apprxeq.f 1 (x,t)+f 2 (x,t); Equation (2).
To accomplish the foregoing, first, each fuel rod simulator (FRS) will
have similar performance characteristics, i.e., power versus axial
position and time, as the other FRS's in the bundle. Each FRS will
have two separate, independent heating elements with identical power
versus length characteristics. Each of the two heating element groups
will be connected to two separate independent power supplies and
each group will also have its own axial power shape. In this way by
varying each group of heating elements separately with time, the
functions f 1 (x,t) and f 2 (x,t) can be generated during a simulated
nuclear reactor transient event, thus providing time varying axial
power shapes typical of reactor transient events.
Various designs of the heating elements can be provided. For
example, a double helix heating member may be provided comprised
of an internal double helix formed of the two heating elements
separated from an outer tubular metallic cladding by suitable
electrically insulating material. The heating element can be fabricated
from a uniform wall thickness tube using a numerically controlled
machine tool. In this way, two continuous helices are generated with a
width versus length variation using the same table which represents
the desired power versus length relationship for each of the length
terms in Equation (2). One end of each of the two helices is
connected to a common ground and the other ends to the two
independently varied power supplies.
In another form of the invention, the two heating elements may
comprise two coaxial heating members separated by electrical

insulating material. The outer element may also serve as the cladding
for the fuel rod simulator. These elements can be either solid like the
direct heater presently in use, or of the helix (either single or double
helix) type. If the elements are solid, the axial power profile can be
realized by either using tapered wall tubes of one material or uniform
wall thickness tubes of s more than one material, with different
coefficients of electrical resistivity.
The method of FRS removal from the test vessels is also important
to their design. In single-ended heaters, the heating element
simulative of the fuel rod exits the pressure vessel at only one end
while the opposite end remains in the vessel. In double-ended
heaters, the heating elements exit the pressure vessel at both the top
and bottom ends and, accordingly, pass straight through the vessel.
Either heater style (single or double-ended) may be of the helix or
coaxial type, or a combination of both types.
In a preferred embodiment according to the present invention, there is
provided apparatus for simulating a nuclear fuel rod bundle transient
comprising a vessel for containing a coolant, a pair of heating
elements disposed in the vessel for disposition in the coolant, a
power supply for supplying power over time to each of the heating
elements and means for independently controlling and thereby
varying the supply of power over time to each heating element
whereby an approximation of the variation in power and axial flux
shape in a nuclear fuel bundle as a function of time can be obtained.
In a further preferred embodiment according to the present invention,
there is provided apparatus for simulating a nuclear fuel rod bundle
transient comprising a vessel for containing a coolant, a plurality of
nuclear fuel rod simulating members disposed in the vessel for
disposition in the coolant and forming a simulated nuclear fuel rod
bundle, each member including a pair of heating elements, a power
supply for supplying power over time to each of the heating elements
and means for independently controlling and thereby varying the
supply of power over time to each heating element of the plurality of
nuclear fuel rod simulating members whereby an approximation of the
variation in power and axial flux shape in a nuclear fuel bundle as a
function of time can be obtained.
In a still further preferred embodiment according to the present
invention, there is provided a method for simulating a nuclear fuel rod
bundle transient comprising the steps of disposing a pair of heating
elements simulative of a nuclear fuel rod in a vessel containing a
coolant, independently supplying power to the heating elements and
controlling the supply of power to the heating elements independently
to vary the power supplied over time to simulate the variation over
time of the power output and axial flux shape in a nuclear fuel bundle.
Accordingly, it is a primary object of the present invention to provide
novel and improved apparatus and methods for simulating an
out-of-pile nuclear reactor transient event to approximate the variation
over time of the power and axial flux shape in a nuclear fuel bundle
during a transient event.
BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE DRAWINGS
FIGS. 1(a)), 1(b) and 1(c) are graphical representations of the output
of a two-element fuel rod simulator according to the present invention
and particularly plot relative power as a function of axial position for
three different times, respectively;
FIG. 1(d) plots total relative power for both elements of the fuel rod
simulator as a function of time;
FIGS. 2(a)) and 2(b) are two different forms (single and double-ended)
of heating elements for the simulator of the present invention;
FIG. 3 is a fragmentary cross-sectional view of the double helix
heating element simulative of a fuel rod in accordance with the
present invention; and
FIG. 4 is a cross-sectional view of another embodiment of the
heating elements using the coaxial type configuration.
BEST MODE FOR CARRYING OUT THE INVENTION

Referring to FIGS. 2(a)) and 2(b), there is illustrated a closed
pressure vessel 10 having a coolant, for example, water, within the
vessel 10. Heating elements according to the present invention are
disposed within vessel 10 in contact with the coolant. Such heating
elements may comprise a single-ended heater rod 12, as in FIG.
2(a)), or a double-ended heater rod 14, as illustrated in FIG. 2(b). A
single-ended heater rod exits the pressure vessel 10 only at one end,
while the double-ended heater rod exits the pressure end at both the
top and bottom ends of vessel 10. One or more of the heater rods
embodying the two heater elements as described below may be
disposed in the vessel 10.
Referring now to FIG. 3, there is illustrated an example of a
single-ended heater rod comprised of a double helix heating element.
Heater rod 16 includes internal double helix heating elements 18 and
20 separated from an outer tubular metallic cladding 22 by suitable
electrical insulation, typically boron nitride. The heating element can
be fabricated from a uniform wall thickness tube using a numerically
controlled machine tool. Thus, two continuous helices are generated
with a width versus length variation which represents the desired
power versus length relationship for each of the two length terms f 1
(x) and f 2 (x), as set forth in Equation (2). One end of each of the two
helices is connected to ground and the other ends are coupled to two
independently variable power supplies. Thus, the heater rod 16 may
be connected to the independent power supply 24 having a controller
26 for varying the power output from supply 24 as a function of time.
Similarly, power for the heater rod 16 is supplied independently from
a separate power supply 28 having a separate controller 30 for
varying the power output from supply 28 to the heater rod 16 as a
different function of time than the controller 26.
Referring now to FIG. 4, there is illustrated in cross-section a pair of
coaxially and radially spaced heating elements forming a heater rod.
The coaxial heater elements 32 and 34 are separated one from the
other by electrically insulating material 36. It will be appreciated that
more than two coaxially arranged heating elements can be provided to
more accurately represent Equation (1) for a nuclear fuel rod. Also,
the cladding may serve as the outer element 34 for the fuel rod
simulator. These elements can be either solid or of a helical
configuration. If the elements are solid, the axial power profile can be
realized by either using tapered wall tubes of one material or uniform
wall thickness tubes of more than one material with different
coefficients of electrical resistivity. The ends of the two heating
elements have a common ground and the other two ends are
connected to electrically separate power supplies, similarly as in the
embodiment of FIG. 3.
With respect to double-ended heater rods as illustrated in FIG. 2,
those rods exit the pressure vessel at both the top and bottom ends.
Double-ended heater rods may be of the helix or coaxial type, or a
combination of both types.
With reference to FIG. 1(a)), there is graphically depicted the output
of the two heater element FRS versus length, i.e., the length along
the simulated fuel rod from its lower end to its upper end, at three
different times. As will be appreciated, the power supplied to each
heater rod element can be independently and continuously changed
over time. Thus, by continuously changing the power supplied to the
heating elements, with one element being weighted toward an initial
steady state condition and the other weighted toward a transient
condition, the total power developed is additive of the two heater
elements at each location along the simulated nuclear rod and the
change in the flux shape as a function of time of a nuclear transient
condition can be simulated. Thus, while previously only the total
bundle power output as a function of time was available, with the
present invention, both the total bundle power output and the axial
change in the flux shape of the simulated nuclear fuel bundle versus
time can be approximated.
A simplified example is given in FIGS. 1(a)) and 1(b). In FIG. 1(a)),
the power output of two heater elements at time t=o is given s
wherein heater element (1) is at 100% power and heater element (2) is
at 0% power, giving an average relative power of about 1.75 for the
four given axial locations (nodes). At time t=t 1, the heater elements
are both at 50% power thereby giving an average relative power of

about 1.312 for the four given axial nodes. At time t=t 2, the heater
element (1) is at 0% power and heater element (2) is at 100% power,
giving an average relative power of about 0.875 for the four axial
nodes. In FIG. 1(b), the graph gives the total relative power variation
for both heater elements with axial position and time. These values
for the simplified representative example of FIGS. 1(a)) and 1(b))
may thus be tabulated as follows:

______________________________________
Tabular Values for FIG. 1
Relative Powers
t = o

t = t1

Axial

(Element #)

Node

(1)

t = t2

(Element #)
(2)

(1)

(2)

(Element #)
(1 + 2)
(1)

(2)

______________________________________
1

1

0

0.5

0.25

0.75

0

0.5

2

3

0

1.5

0.5

2.0

0

1.0

3

2

0

1.0

0.75

1.75

0

1.5

4

1

0

0.5

0.25

0.75

0

0.5

0

0.875

Average
1.75

0.4375
1.3125 0

0.875

Relative
Power
______________________________________

Consequently, it will be seen that the independently controlled heater
elements may approximate or simulate in power output and axial flux
shape a nuclear fuel bundle as a function of time.
While the invention has been described in connection with what is
presently considered to be the most practical and preferred
embodiment, it is to be understood that the invention is not to be
limited to the disclosed embodiment, but on the contrary, is intended
to cover various modifications and equivalent arrangements included
within the spirit and scope of the appended claims.
*****

Home | Browse by Inventor | Browse by Date | Resources | Contact Us
© 2004-6 PatentStorm LLC. All rights reserved.

