The American Breeder Reactor
COMMENT BY JAY BOUDREAU

.

rom its inception the breeder
reactor has been described as
a self-fueling energy machine,
the answer to our energy
needs in the coming century. The United
States started up the world’s first breeder
reactor in 1951 and followed with an
operational pilot plant in 1963, the 20megawatt-electric (MWe) Experimental
Breeder Reactor II (EBR II). In 1969 we
completed the initial design for an intermediate size (300-MWe) breeder reactor
to be built at Clinch River, Tennessee, as
the major step toward a commercially
viable power generation system. In 1971
President Nixon established the liquid-metal fast breeder reactor (LMFBR)
as the nation’s highest priority research
and development effort. Yet today, ten
years later, we have slipped from our
world preeminence in breeder technology, and the direction and very future of
the breeder development program in the
United States is now uncertain.
Meanwhile, the French, the British,
and the Russians proceeded with their
own original plans: the 250-MWe
Phenix, the 250-MWe Prototype Fast
Reactor (PFR), and the 350-MWe
Bystrye Neitrony (BN-350) all came
on--line about 1974. The French and the
Russians have continued their programs.
The Russian 600-MWe Bystrye
Neitrony (BN-600) came on-line in 1979;
their 1600-MWe Bystrye Neitrony
(BN-1600) is scheduled for 1986. The
1200-MWe French Super-Phenix is
scheduled for completion in 1984. Today
it is France who leads the world in
breeder reactor technology.
The slowdown and all-but demise of
the American breeder reactor program
have resulted partly from uranium fuel
costs, partly from breeder reactor de-

F

118

velopment costs, and partly from the
politics of nonproliferation of nuclear
weapons. Just the cost of producing
plutonium fuel from a breeder is high
enough to keep utility companies in the
United States from being seriously interested in the breeder at this time. For
example, the current market price of
mined, processed uranium fuel (yellowcake), which is $25 per pound, would
have to increase to nearly $165 per
pound in today’s dollars before the
breeder would be financially competitive
with the light-water reactor. cost
equivalence might take seventy-five to
one hundred years unless crises arise in
fossil fuels and imported oil. Consequently, today there is little market pressure to maintain the impetus of the
breeder programs begun in the Nixon
era.
The cost of development and construction is another problem in the
breeder reactor program. Currently, the
capital cost of the breeder is significantly
higher than that of the light-water reactor. Constructing a 1000-MWe
light-water reactor would cost about
$1.7 billion, while a fast breeder reactor
system of comparable power could cost
$3.4 billion. Because of the excessive
cost, United States utility companies are
reluctant to undertake the purchase of a
breeder system without government subsidies. In France, where there is a shortage of domestic energy resources,
breeder construction is subsidized as a
matter of government policy. However,
in this country opposition to such a
policy has come from both political
parties. For example, in a 1977 letter to
the House of Representatives, Michigan
Congressman David Stockman, who is
now President Reagan’s Budget Direc-

tor, denounced the Clinch River project
as “totally incompatible with our free
market approach to energy policy.”
The politics of nuclear weapons proliferation is still another issue in the
breeder program. Because of grave international concern about proliferation,
President Carter in April 1977 called for
indefinite deferral of construction of
commercial breeder reactors. Breeders
are considered hazardous because they
produce rather large quantities of
plutonium, the basic material of nuclear
weapons. However, separation of
plutonium from breeder reactor fuel requires sophisticated reprocessing, and
fabrication of nuclear weapons requires
still further technology. The International Fuel Cycle Evaluation report published in 1979 found that the breeder fuel
cycle poses no greater threat of international weapons proliferation than does
the light-water reactor system. In 1981
an Iraqi reactor was destroyed by Israel
in order to stop development of nuclear
weapons in Iraq; that reactor was not a
breeder but a light-water type. In the
United States the proliferation-inspired
moratorium has locked up our breeder
program for four years; now, under a
new administration, we are just beginning to take another look at the program. Whether the breeder development
should simply pick up where it left off is
open to question.
On the technical side the case for
completing the 350-MWe Clinch River
breeder reactor as a demonstration,
power-producing facility is debatable.
The reason for building commercial
plants of gradually increasing size is to
learn about scaling. It is not possible, for
example, to ensure successful construction and operation of a 1000-MWe
LOS ALAMOS SCIENCE

Program Gets a Second Chance
COMMENT
breeder facility by extrapolating from
our experience with the 20-MWe Experimental Breeder Reactor II. Thus,
Clinch River was to be a steppingstone,
On the other hand, even during the
Carter deferral of commercialization,
funding for building and testing Clinch
River’s large components continued. The
Department of Energy constructed large
facilities specifically designed to test
pumps, heat exchangers, and other parts.
By now the components have been largely tested, and most of what will be
learned from building Clinch River will
be how the components behave together
in an operating plant. While this is
valuable knowledge, its direct applicability is diminished by the fact that
present plans for the next generation
facility, familiarly known as Son of
Clinch, do not retain the same design
features. Therefore, from a developmental point of view, the Clinch River
project would increase in value if its
design were modified to include these
new features.
An even more important step toward
commercialization would be construction of a larger, more advanced developmental plant. The concept for this larger
plant is another result of the moratorium
on breeder commercialization. When
President Carter stopped the Clinch River project in 1977, he instituted a
four-year conceptual design study to
evaluate a variety of breeder designs that
might minimize the threat of proliferation and enhance overall breeder effectiveness. The report, just issued to Congress last March, outlines a modern,
streamlined, large developmental plant
with state-of-the-art features not available when the Clinch River breeder was
designed. This large developmental plant
LOS ALAMOS SCIENCE

has more advanced pumps, heat exchangers, steam generators, and cooling
loops. Its design is close to what we now
envision for commercial plants. However, technical considerations alone do
not dictate the timing for such a plant.
There are two questions. How can we
finance the large developmental plant?
And how should its construction tie in
with the now revived Clinch River
project? The large developmental plant
is in the 1000-MWe range and, as mentioned before, would cost $3.4 billion in
1981 dollars. One option would be to
begin the large plant at some time in the
future when expenditures for Clinch River have declined, But if too much time
elapses, companies will not be able to
afford to keep the existing cadre of
experienced designers and reactor manufacturers on the payroll. The team will
disband, and the price this country will
pay is the lead time necessary to reassemble the team. No one really knows
how many years this would take or what
it would cost.
So far, $1 billion in tax dollars has
been spent on Clinch River; the total
cost estimate in current dollars is $3.0 to
$3.2 billion. The original cost estimate
was $700 million. An associated reprocessing facility is also planned, and its
development could cost as much as
another $1 billion. To build the large
plant concurrently would require an innovative financing scheme. One suggestion is a Congressionally chartered corporation composed of personnel from
government, from national laboratories,
and from industries and utilities. The
corporation would be empowered to
enter the private capital market to seek
funding. The government could provide
a loan guarantee and could possibly pay

the interest on the loan. The term of the
loan would commence during plant construction and would terminate when the
loan had been repaid from revenue generated by power sales. Revenue from
continued operation would be used to
repay Treasury for its contribution of
interest monies. Such a scheme could
reduce to $800 million the government
investment in the large plant.
Two decades ago the breeder reactor
was an experimental technology with
great promise for solving future energy
problems. The United States was a world
leader in that technology. Now, when
energy is a very immediate problem for
most of the world, breeder reactors in
France and in the Soviet Union are
beginning to fulfill their promise. But we
are still in the developmental stage; we
have lost our sense of urgency about
breeders; and our entire nuclear industry
is just beginning to recover from the
aftereffects of the Three Mile Island
accident.
Our country’s energy future is not at
all secure; another series of crises over
imported oil and new demands and higher prices for uranium could make the
breeder reactor very attractive thirty
years from now. From our own experience and from watching the European efforts, we know that development
and commercial plant production take
twenty years or more. We also know
that the costs of development and construction are rising rapidly. Much of the
preliminary testing of breeder reactor
components is done. Now the
moratorium is over. It seems a good time
to go forward either with a revised
intermediate project at Clinch River or
with a new large developmental
plant—or with both. ■
119

