Search This Site

Thermal Hydraulics and Fluid Dynamics Central
Tell a
Friend
Search This Site
TH Home
CFD Information
MathCad Solutions
Natural Circulation
Computer Codes
Finite Element

What is Thermal Hydraulics? Thermal Hydraulics (T/H) is the the study and/or
analysis of a fluid that is influenced by the addition of heat. The fluid could be a
multi-component, multi-phase fluid that is usually flowing or accelerating in a
fixed structure, e.g.., piping system or large vessel. The heat can be added in
many different ways. For example, heat can be added to the fluid from
conduction through a heat exchanger or by radiation heat transfer from extremely
hot rods. Because of the potentially complicated nature of thermal hydraulic
engineering and analysis, the methods used to simulate the behavior of the
multi-phase fluid flow are very complicated.

Fluid Dynamics I
Fluid Dynamics II
Fluid Dynamics
Calculations
Fuel Rack Design
Nuclear Related Papers
Free Software
Heat Transfer

Hydrology

Thermal Hydraulics Central is dedicated to providing the most up to date
information in the area of thermal hydraulics and fluid dynamic engineering and
analysis. The site has extensive information on fluid dynamics and heat transfer,
which are integral technical specialties of thermal hydraulics. T/H Central also
provides information on many areas of fluid flow, material properties, numerical
methods, research, computer software and other related topics. Thermal
Hydraulics Central provides free calculators and information for many fluid flow
related areas. So look around and enjoy. If you know of a better information
source, let us know at SiteManager@THCentral.com .

Materials Property
National Labs
Nuclear Technology

Nuclear Thermal
Hydraulics

Thermal-hydraulic evaluation and analysis is one of the many engineering
services provided by EDA, Inc.. Thermal-hydraulic evaluation and analysis is a
very specialized field and should be performed by experienced engineering
personnel. EDA, Inc. has the experience and knowledge to complete the most
challenging thermal-hydraulic assessments.

Numerical Methods
RELAP5
Research
Simulations
Stability
Topics

Books
Math Information
Guide to Calculators

Guide to
Arithmetic
Math History

EDA, Inc. has experience in the following areas:
Steady State fluid flow simulation with and without heat transfer, e. g.,
feedwater and service water system balancing.
Multi-Component, two-phase flow simulation, e. g., a) steam flow into a
nitrogen filed containment, b) forces caused by a pump start after air is
drawn into the pipe line by condensing steam.
Transient two-phase simulation, e. g., a) simulating the behavior of a reactor
power plant during a small break in the primary or secondary systems or
during an anticipate transient without scram.
Loss-of-Coolant-Accident simulations. These events are primarily evaluated
for nuclear power plants. All aspects of thermal hydraulic simulation are
explored including reactor kinetics and decay heat.

American Family
Computers

Genealogy
Other Sites
Shopping

Computer
Shopping
American Family
Computers

Genealogy

These are just a few examples. To get more detailed experience for one of the
EDA, Inc. principals, go to an EDA Resume.
A Thermal-Hydraulic evaluation consists generally of three parts.
A review of the problem and/or problem objectives should be performed so
decisions on resources, such as computer tools, can be made
successfully.. This, of course is the most crucial part of the evaluation
process. The engineer should look at all aspects of the problem and/or
mission to determine the proper tools and techniques one should use to
achieve accurate results and minimize cost. It is really important that the
proper/correct thermal-hydraulic computer programs are selected. For
example, if the fluid in the system being evaluated is single phase at high
pressure, the design computer program of choice may be a finite element
computer program. Some of the methods and computer programs available
for finite element analyses are provided on the Finite Element page. If the
process being evaluated is, for example, a steam generator, the more
appropriate choice may be a finite difference program, e. g., RELAP5.
Some of the thermal hydraulic computer programs are presented on the

thermal hydraulic Computer Program page. Many Thermal Hydraulic
Computer Programs are available and it is imperative that the appropriate
computer programs are use the first time. It is also important that these
programs have the proper quality assurance performed. This includes the
validation of the program to simulate the process and the validation of the
user to be able to use the program to simulate the process. All these areas
are important in the initial phases of the evaluation to ensure that cost is
held to a minimum. In all cases, scope analyses should be completed to
determine the initial estimates of analytical response and cost. In some
cases these analyses reveal that a more detailed analysis is not required
and the project cost may be reduced significantly. Many of these initial
analyses can be performed using the calculators provided at the EDA, Inc.'s
Calculator site.

Once the calculations are finished, they must be reviewed for accuracy and
for practicality. This review is usually accomplished by the QA reviewer
following the procedures provided in the QA program. The quality of the
practicality review is based on the experience level of the organization that
has completed the calculation and on the experience level of the reviewing
organization. Questions that should be answered even for large established
companies are: a) Is there an adequate experience level of the performer
and reviewer to provide a good safe and reliable product? and b) Were the
evaluations performed according to necessary regulatory and company
standards?

The final product must be delivered in a form that is transferable, readable
and defendable. For any given project, EDA, Inc. ensures proper QA for the
software and provides experienced individuals so the product can be
presented successfully in front of oversight and/or regulatory authorities.
Additionally, the final recommended solution must be practical enough to
successfully implement. In most cases it will be necessary for the analyst
to interface with the system and construction engineers so the final product
can be installed successfully. EDA, Inc personnel have many years of
experience in implementing analytical solutions for operating systems.
Contact EDA, Inc at SiteManager@edasolutions.com .

| About Us | Feedback | Thermal Hydraulics Home |
For comments send an email to: SiteManager@i-edainc.com
Copyright © 2001-2002 EDA, Inc.. All rights reserved.
Revised: November 03, 2003 .
PW

